\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ghub.info
@settitle Ghub User and Developer Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@copying
@quotation
Copyright (C) 2017-2018 Jonas Bernoulli <jonas@@bernoul.li>

You can redistribute this document and/or modify it under the terms
of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

This document is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Ghub: (ghub).         Minuscule client library for the Github API.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Ghub User and Developer Manual
@subtitle for version 1.3.0 (v1.3.0-36-gca466a0+1)
@author Jonas Bernoulli
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Ghub User and Developer Manual

Ghub is a library that provides basic support for using the Github API
from Emacs packages.  It abstracts access to API resources using only
a handful of functions that are not resource-specific.

It also handles the creation, storage and use of access tokens using a
setup wizard, to make it easier for users to get started and to reduce
the support burden imposed on package maintainers.  It also comes with
a comprehensive manual to address the cases when things don't just
work as expected.

Ghub is intentionally limited to only provide these two essential
features — basic request functions and guided setup — to avoid being
too opinionated, which would hinder wide adaption.  It is assumed that
wide adoption would make life easier for users and maintainers alike,
because then all packages that talk to the Github API could be
configured the same way.

@noindent
This manual is for Ghub version 1.3.0 (v1.3.0-36-gca466a0+1).

@quotation
Copyright (C) 2017-2018 Jonas Bernoulli <jonas@@bernoul.li>

You can redistribute this document and/or modify it under the terms
of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

This document is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.
@end quotation
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Limitations::
* Getting Started::
* Using Ghub in Personal Scripts::
* Using Ghub in a Package::
* API::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Getting Started

* Setting the Username::
* Interactively Creating and Storing a Token::
* Manually Creating and Storing a Token::
* How Ghub uses Auth-Source::

API

* Making Requests::
* Authentication::
* Configuration Variables::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Ghub is a library that provides basic support for using the Github API
from Emacs packages.  It abstracts access to API resources using only
a handful of functions that are not resource-specific.

It also handles the creation, storage and use of access tokens using a
setup wizard, to make it easier for users to get started and to reduce
the support burden imposed on package maintainers.  It also comes with
a comprehensive manual to address the cases when things don't just
work as expected.

Ghub is intentionally limited to only provide these two essential
features — basic request functions and guided setup — to avoid being
too opinionated, which would hinder wide adaption.

Fancier interfaces can implemented on top of Ghub, and one such
wrapper — named simply Ghub+ — has already been implemented.  The
benefit of basing various opinionated interfaces on top of a single
library that provides only the core functionality is that choosing the
programming interface does no longer also dictate how access tokens
are handled.  Users can then use multiple packages that access the
Github API without having to learn the various incompatible ways
packages expects the appropriate token to be made available to them.

Ghub uses the built-in @code{auth-source} library to store access tokens.
That library is very flexible and supports multiple backends, which
means that it is up to the user how secrets are stored.  They can,
among other things, choose between storing secrets in plain text for
ease of use, or encrypted for better security.

Previously (as in until this library is widely adapted) it was up to
package authors to decide if things should be easy or secure.  (Note
that @code{auth-source} defaults to "easy" — you have been warned.)

Ghub expects package authors to use a dedicated access token instead
of sharing a single token between all packages that rely on it.  That
means that users cannot configure Ghub once and later start using a
new package without any additional setup.  But Ghub helps with that.

When the user invokes some command defined in some package and that
ultimately results in @code{ghub-request} being called and the appropriate
token is not available yet, then the user is guided through the
process of creating and storing a new token, and at the end of that
process the request is carried out as if the token had been available
to begin with.

@node Limitations
@chapter Limitations

As mentioned, Ghub restricts itself to provide core functionality and
leaves it to other libraries to do opinionated things on top of that.
But currently there also are some limitations that concern the core
parts.  Obviously these limitations have to be lifted to maximize
adaption and so they will.

These secondary features already exist (just mentioning them, so you
don't assume that they don't):

@itemize
@item
Support for Github Enterprise instances.


@item
Support for token scope validation.
@end itemize

These features will likely never be implemented in Ghub:

@itemize
@item
Functions for particular resources.


@item
Using something other than json-like alists to handle what the
Github API calls "parameters".


@item
Retrieving an existing token.  Github does not support it so we
cannot do it.  If you lose your local copy of a token, then you have
to replace it with a new one.
@end itemize

These features are not supported yet:

@itemize
@item
Asynchronous requests are not supported yet.


@item
The Github GraphQL API is not supported yet.


@item
If a request fails due to a missing scope, then that isn't handled
by @code{ghub-request} yet.  For now package authors just have to hope that
users don't mess with scopes or handle such errors themselves.

Likewise, other errors too should be handled by Ghub.


@item
Packages cannot request additional scopes.

Once a token has been created a package cannot request new scopes
that it previously did not need.  I am not quite sure yet whether
Ghub should support that.  An alternative would be to let packages
at least invalidate their own tokens.


@item
Other Git forges (Gitlab, Bitbucket@dots{}) are not supported.

Support for other forges will likely be implemented using @strong{other}
libraries that are very similar to this library.  Whether common
code will be factored out into a library to be used by all these
libraries or whether some code duplication is to be preferred, has
not been decided yet.
@end itemize

@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

If you would like to use a package that uses this library, then just
do so.  If the necessary information isn't available when it attempts
to make a request, then you will be asked to provide it.

@menu
* Setting the Username::
* Interactively Creating and Storing a Token::
* Manually Creating and Storing a Token::
* How Ghub uses Auth-Source::
@end menu

@node Setting the Username
@section Setting the Username

If you haven't set the Git variable @code{github.user} yet when making a
request, then you will be asked:

@example
Git variable `github.user' is unset.  Set to:
@end example

You are expected to provide your Github username here.  The provided
value will be saved globally (using @code{git config --global github.user
USERNAME}).

If you need to identify as another user in a particular repository,
then you have to set that variable locally, @strong{before} making a request:

@example
cd /path/to/repo
git config github.user USERNAME
@end example

For Github Enterprise instances you have to specify where the API can
be accessed @strong{before} you try to access it and a different variable has
to be used to set the username.  For example if the API is available
at @code{https://example.com/api/v3}, then you should do this:

@example
# Do this once
git config --global github.example.com/api/v3.user EMPLOYEE

# Do this for every corporate repository
cd /path/to/repo
git config github.host example.com/api/v3
@end example

If you do not set @code{github.example.com/api/v3.user}, then you will be
asked to provide the value when trying to make a request, but you do
have to manually set @code{github.host}, or Ghub assumes that you are trying
to access @code{api.github.com}.

@node Interactively Creating and Storing a Token
@section Interactively Creating and Storing a Token

Ghub uses a different token for every package as well as for every
machine from which you access the Github API (and obviously also for
every Github instance and user).  This allows packages to only request
the scopes that they actually need and also gives users the
opportunity to refuse access to certain scopes if they expect to not
use the features that need them.

Usually you don't have to worry about creating and storing a token
yourself and can just make a request.  Note however that you don't
have to use the setup wizard described below.  Alternatively you can
perform the setup manually as described in the next section.

Unfortunately the wizard does not work (yet?) if you have enabled
two-factor authentication, in which case the token has to be created
and stored manually.

If you make a request and the required token is not available yet,
then the setup wizard will first ask you something like this:

@example
Such a Github API token is not available:

  Host:    api.github.com
  User:    USERNAME
  Package: PACKAGE

  Scopes requested in `PACKAGE-github-token-scopes':
    repo
  Store locally according to `auth-sources':
    ("~/.authinfo" "~/.authinfo.gpg" "~/.netrc")
  Store on Github as:
    "Emacs package FOO @@ LOCAL-MACHINE"

WARNING: If you have enabled two-factor authentication
         then you have to create the token manually.

If in doubt, then abort and first view the section of the Ghub
documentation called "Manually Creating and Storing a Token".

Create and store such a token? (yes or no)
@end example

If you don't have any doubts, then answer "yes".  Lets address some
of the doubts that you might have:

@itemize
@item
Unfortunately Ghub cannot know whether you have enabled two-factor
authentication without making a request using basic (password)
authentication, which it cannot do if you have enabled two-factor
authentication.  It also cannot determine whether you have enabled
two-factor authentication depending on whether a request fails or
not because there are other reasons why a request might fail.

So this warning is always displayed and you are expected to know
whether you have enabled two-factor authentication or not.  If you
have, then you must abort and see @ref{Manually Creating and Storing a Token}.


@item
@code{Host} usually is "api.github.com" and that's usually what you want.
If you are trying to access a Github Enterprise instance, then it
should be something else and you have to set the value manually as
described in the next section.


@item
@code{User} should be your Github.com (or Github Enterprise instance)
username.  If it is something else, then you made a mistake at the
first prompt or during the step describe in the previous section and
have to refer to that in order to fix this issue.


@item
@code{Package} should be the name of the package you are using to access
the Github API.

If it is @code{ghub}, then the package author disregarded that convention
and you should probably report a bug in the issue tracker of that
package.

Or you yourself are using @code{ghub-request} or one of its wrappers
directly, in which case this is expected and perfectly fine.  In
that case you might however want to abort and change the value of
the variable @code{ghub-github-token-scopes} before triggering the wizard
again.


@item
Each PACKAGE has to specify the tokens that it needs using a
variable named @code{PACKAGE-github-token-scopes}.  The doc-string of that
variable should document why the various scopes are needed.

The meaning of the various scopes are documented at
@uref{https://magit.vc/goto/f63aeb0a}.


@item
The value of @code{auth-sources} is shown.  The default value causes
secrets to be stored in plain text.  Because this might be
unexpected, Ghub additionally displays a warning when appropriate.

@example
WARNING: ... unencrypted ... TODO implement ...
@end example

Whether that is something that needs fixing, is up to you.  If your
answer is yes, then you should abort and see @ref{How Ghub uses Auth-Source} for instructions on how to save the token more securely.


@item
When creating a token it is necessary to provide a token
description.  Ghub used descriptions that have the form "Emacs
package PACKAGE @@ LOCAL-MACHINE".

Github uses the token description to identify the token, not merely
as something useful to humans.  Token descriptions therefore have to
be unique and in rare cases you get an additional prompt, asking you
something like:

@example
A token named "Emacs package FOO @@ LOCAL-MACHINE"
already exists on Github.  Replace it?
@end example

You might see this message when you have lost the old token and want
to replace it with a new one, in which case you should obviously just
proceed.

Or two of your computers have the same hostname, which is bad
practice because it gains you nothing but leads to issues such as
this.  Or you are dual-booting on this machine and use the same
hostname in all operating systems, which is a somewhat reasonable
thing to do.

In either case you will have to use something other than the value
returned by @code{system-name} to identify the current machine or operating
system.  Or you can continue to identify different things using the
same identifier, in which case you have to manually distribute the
token.

The former is recommended and also easier to do, using the variable
@code{ghub-override-system-name}.  See @ref{Configuration Variables} for
details.
@end itemize

@node Manually Creating and Storing a Token
@section Manually Creating and Storing a Token

If you have enabled two-factor authentication, then you have to create
and store access tokens yourself.  You might also prefers to always do
it manually to have more control than when relying on the setup wizard.

If you cannot or don't want to use the wizard then you have to (1)
figure out what scopes a package wants, (2) create such a token using
the web interface and (3) store the token where Ghub expects to find
it.

A package named PACKAGE has to specify the scopes that it wants in the
variable named @code{PACKAGE-ghub-token-scopes}.  The doc-string of such
variables should document what the various scopes are needed for.

To create or edit a token go to @uref{https://github.com/settings/tokens}.

Finally store the token in a place where Ghub looks for it, as described
in @ref{How Ghub uses Auth-Source}.

@node How Ghub uses Auth-Source
@section How Ghub uses Auth-Source

Please see @ref{Top,,,auth,} for all the gory details about Auth-Source.
Some Ghub-specific information and important notes follow.

The variable @code{auth-sources} controls how and where Auth-Source stores
new secrets and where it looks for known secrets.  The default value
is @code{("~/.authinfo" "~/.authinfo.gpg" "~/.netrc")}, which means that it
looks in all of these files in order to find secrets and that it
stores new secrets in @code{~/.authinfo} because that is the first element of
the list.  It doesn't matter which files already do or don't exist
when storing a new secret, the first file is always used.

Secrets are stored in @code{~/.authinfo} in plain text.  If you don't want
that (good choice), then you have to customize @code{auth-sources} e.g. by
flipping the positions of the first two elements.

Auth-Source also supports storing secrets in various key-chains, refer
to its documentation for more information.

Some Auth-Source backends only support storing three values per entry,
the "machine", the "login" and the "password".  Because Ghub uses
separate tokens for each package, it has to squeeze four values into
those three slots, and it does that by using "USERNAME@math{^PACKAGE}" as the
"login".

Assuming your username is "ziggy" and the package is named "stardust",
an entry in one of the three mentioned files would then look like
this:

@example
machine api.github.com login ziggy^stardust password 012345abcdef...
@end example

@node Using Ghub in Personal Scripts
@chapter Using Ghub in Personal Scripts

You can use @code{ghub-request} and its wrapper functions in your personal
scripts of course.  Unlike when you use Ghub from a package that you
distribute for others to use, you don't have to specify a package in
personal scripts.

@lisp
;; This is perfectly acceptable in personal scripts ...
(ghub-get "/user")

;; ... and actually equal to
(ghub-get "/user" nil :auth 'ghub)

;; In packages you have to specify the package using AUTH.
(ghub-get "/user" nil :auth 'foobar)
@end lisp

When you do not specify the AUTH argument, then a request is made on
behalf of the @code{ghub} package itself.  Like for any package that uses
Ghub, @code{ghub} has to declare what scopes it needs, using, in this case,
the variable @code{ghub-github-token-scopes}.

The default value of that variable is @code{(repo)} and you might want to add
additional scopes.  You can later add additional scopes to an existing
token, using the web interface at @uref{https://github.com/settings/tokens}.

If you do that, then you might want to also set the variable
accordingly, but note that Ghub only consults that when @strong{creating} a new
token.  If you want to know a token's effective scopes use the command
@code{ghub-token-scopes}, described in the next section.

@node Using Ghub in a Package
@chapter Using Ghub in a Package

Every package should use its own token.  This allows you as the author
of some package to only request access to API scopes that are actually
needed, which in turn might make it easier for users to trust your
package not to do unwanted things.

The scopes used by PACKAGE have to be defined using the variable
@code{PACKAGE-github-token-scopes}, and you have to tell @code{ghub-request} on
behalf of what package a request is being made by passing the symbol
PACKAGE as the value of its AUTH argument.

@lisp
(ghub-request "GET" "/user" nil :auth 'PACKAGE)
@end lisp

@defvar PACKAGE-github-token-scopes

This variable defines the token scopes requested by the package
named PACKAGE.  The doc-string should explain what the various
scopes are needed for to prevent users from giving PACKAGE fewer
permissions than it absolutely needs and also to give them greater
confidence that PACKAGE is only requesting the permissions that it
actually need.

The value of this variable does not necessarily correspond to the
scopes that the respective token actually gives access to.  There is
nothing that prevents users from changing the value @strong{after} creating
the token or from editing the token's scopes later on.

So it is pointless to check the value of this variable before making
a request.  You also should not query the API to reliably determine
the supported tokens before making a query.  Doing the latter would
mean that every request becomes two requests and that the first
request would have to be done using the user's password instead of a
token.
@end defvar

@cindex ghub-token-scopes
@deffn Command ghub-token-scopes

Because we cannot be certain that the user hasn't messed up the
scopes, Ghub provides this command to make it easy to debug such
issues without having to rely on users being thoughtful enough to
correctly determine the used scopes manually.

Just tell users to run @code{M-x ghub-token-scopes} and to provide the
correct values for the HOST, USERNAME and PACKAGE when prompted,
and to then post the output.

It is to be expected that users will occasionally mess that up so
this command does not only output the scopes but also the user input
so that you can have greater confidence in the validity of the
user's answer.

@example
Scopes for USERNAME^PACKAGE@@HOST: (SCOPE...)
@end example
@end deffn

@node API
@chapter API

This section describes the Ghub API.  In other words it describes the
public functions and variables provided by the Ghub library and not
the Github API that can be accessed by using those functions.  The
latter is documented at @uref{https://developer.github.com/v3}.

@menu
* Making Requests::
* Authentication::
* Configuration Variables::
@end menu

@node Making Requests
@section Making Requests

@defun ghub-request method resource &optional params &key query payload headers unpaginate noerror reader username auth host

This function make a request for RESOURCE using METHOD.  PARAMS,
QUERY, PAYLOAD and/or HEADERS are alists holding additional request
data.  The response body is returned and the response header in
stored in the variable @code{ghub-response-headers}.

@itemize
@item
METHOD is the http method, given as a string.

@item
RESOURCE is the resource to access, given as a string beginning
with a slash.


@item
PARAMS, QUERY, PAYLOAD and HEADERS are alists and are used to
specify request data.  All these arguments are alists that
resemble the Json expected and returned by the Github API.  The
keys are symbols and the values are stored in the @code{cdr} (not the
@code{cadr}) and can be strings, integers and lists of strings and
integers.

The Github API documentation is vague on how data has to be
transmitted and for a particular resource usually just talks about
"parameters".  Generally speaking when the METHOD is "HEAD" or
"GET", then they have to be transmitted as a query, otherwise as a
payload.

@itemize
@item
Use PARAMS to automatically transmit like QUERY or PAYLOAD would
depending on METHOD.

@item
Use QUERY to explicitly transmit data as a query.

@item
Use PAYLOAD to explicitly transmit data as a payload.

@item
Use HEADERS for those rare resources that require that the data
is transmitted as headers instead of as a query or payload.
When that is the case, then the Github API documentation usually
mentions it explicitly.
@end itemize


@item
If UNPAGINATE is non-nil, then this function makes multiple
requests if necessary to get all items at RESOURCE.

@item
If NOERROR is non-nil, then no error is raised if the request
fails and @code{nil} is returned instead.

@item
If READER is non-nil, then it is used to read and return from the
response buffer.  The default is @code{ghub--read-json-response}.  For
the very few resources that do not return json, you might want to
use @code{ghub--read-raw-response}.


@item
If USERNAME is non-nil, then the request is made on behalf of that
user.  It is better to specify the user using the Git variable
@code{github.user} for "api.github.com", or @code{github.HOST.user} if
connecting to a Github Enterprise instance.


@item
Each package that uses Ghub should use its own token. If AUTH is
nil, then the generic @code{ghub} token is used instead.  This is only
acceptable for personal utilities.  A packages that is distributed
to other users should always use this argument to identify itself,
using a symbol matching its name.

Package authors who find this inconvenient should write a wrapper
around this function and possibly for the method specific
functions also.

Some symbols have a special meaning.  @code{none} means to make an
unauthorized request.  @code{basic} means to make a password based
request.  If the value is a string, then it is assumed to be a
valid token.  @code{basic} and an explicit token string are only intended
for internal and debugging uses.

If AUTH is a package symbol, then the scopes are specified using
the variable @code{AUTH-github-token-scopes}.  It is an error if that is
not specified.  See @code{ghub-github-token-scopes} for an example.


@item
If HOST is non-nil, then connect to that Github instance.  This
defaults to "api.github.com".  When a repository is connected to
a Github Enterprise instance, then it is better to specify that
using the Git variable @code{github.host} instead of using this argument.
@end itemize
@end defun

@defvar ghub-response-headers

A select few Github API resources respond by transmitting data in
the response header instead of in the response body.  Because there
are so few of these inconsistencies @code{ghub-request} always returns
the response body.

To access the response header use this variable after @code{ghub-request}
has returned.
@end defvar

@defvar ghub-override-system-name

If non-nil, the value of this variable is used to override the value
returned by @code{system-name} for the purpose of identifying the local
machine, which is necessary because Ghub uses separate tokens for
each machine.  Also see @ref{Configuration Variables}.
@end defvar

@defvar ghub-github-token-scopes
@end defvar
@defvar PACKAGE-github-token-scopes

Such a variable define the token scopes requested by the respective
package PACKAGE given by the first word in the variable name.  @code{ghub}
itself is treated like any other package.  Also see @ref{Using Ghub in a Package}.
@end defvar

@defun ghub-head resource &optional params &key query payload headers unpaginate noerror reader username auth host
@end defun
@defun ghub-get resource &optional params &key query payload headers unpaginate noerror reader username auth host

These functions are simple wrappers around @code{ghub-request}.  Their
signature is identical to that of the latter, except that they do
not have an argument named METHOD.  The http method is instead
given by the second word in the function name.

As described in the documentation for @code{ghub-request}, it depends on
the used method whether the value of the PARAMS argument is used
as the query or the payload.  For the "HEAD" and "GET" methods it
is used as the query.
@end defun

@defun ghub-put resource &optional params &key query payload headers unpaginate noerror reader username auth host
@end defun
@defun ghub-post resource &optional params &key query payload headers unpaginate noerror reader username auth host
@end defun
@defun ghub-patch resource &optional params &key query payload headers unpaginate noerror reader username auth host
@end defun
@defun ghub-delete resource &optional params &key query payload headers unpaginate noerror reader username auth host

These functions are simple wrappers around @code{ghub-request}.  Their
signature is identical to that of the latter, except that they do
not have an argument named METHOD.  The http method is instead
given by the second word in the function name.

As described in the documentation for @code{ghub-request}, it depends on
the used method whether the value of the PARAMS argument is used
as the query or the payload.  For the "PUT", "POST", "PATCH" and
"DELETE" methods it is used as the payload.
@end defun

@defun ghub-wait resource &optional username auth host duration

Some API requests result in an immediate successful response even
when the requested action has not actually been carried out yet.
An example is the request for the creation of a new repository,
which doesn't cause the repository to immediately become available.
The Github API documentation usually mention this when describing
an affected resource.

If you want to do something with some resource right after creating
after making a request for its creation, then you might have to wait
for it to actually be created.  This function can be used to do so.
It repeatedly tries to access the resource until it becomes
available or until the timeout exceeds.  In the latter case it
signals @code{ghub-error}.

RESOURCE specifies the resource that this function waits for.

DURATION specifies for how many seconds to wait at most, defaulting
to 64 seconds.  Emacs will block during that time, but the user can
abort using @code{C-g}.

The first attempt is made immediately and often that will actually
succeed.  If not, then another attempt is made after two seconds,
and each subsequent attempt is made after waiting as long as we
already waited between all preceding attempts combined.

See @code{ghub-request}'s documentation above for information about the
other arguments.
@end defun

@node Authentication
@section Authentication

@cindex ghub-create-token
@deffn Command ghub-create-token

This command creates a new token using the values it reads from the
user and then stores it according to variable @code{auth-sources}.  It can
also be called non-interactively, but you shouldn't do that
yourself.

This is useful if you want fully setup things before attempting to
make the initial request, if you want to provide fewer than the
requested scopes or customize @code{auth-sources} first, or if something
has gone wrong when using the wizard that is used when making a
request without doing this first.  (Note that instead of using this
command you can also just repeat the initial request after making
the desired adjustments — that is easier.)

This command reads, in that order, the HOST (Github instance), the
USERNAME, the PACKAGE and the SCOPES in the minibuffer, providing
reasonable default choices.  SCOPES defaults to the scopes that
PACKAGE requests using the variable @code{PACKAGE-github-token-scopes}.
@end deffn

@cindex ghub-token-scopes
@deffn Command ghub-token-scopes

Users are free to give a token access to fewer scopes than what the
respective package requested.  That can of course lead to issues and
package maintainers have to be able to quickly determine if such a
(mis-)configuration is the root cause when users report issues.

This command reads the required values in the minibuffer and then
shows a message containing these values along with the scopes of the
respective token.  It also returns the scopes (only) when called
non-interactively. Also see @ref{Using Ghub in a Package}.
@end deffn

@node Configuration Variables
@section Configuration Variables

The username and, unless you only use Github.com itself, the Github
Enterprise instance have to be configured using Git variables.  In
rare cases it might also be necessary to specify the identity of the
local machine, which is done using a lisp variable.

@defvar github.user

The Github.com username.  This should be set globally and if you
have multiple Github.com user accounts, then you should set this
locally only for those repositories that you want to access using
the secondary identity.
@end defvar

@defvar github.HOST.user

This variable serves the same purpose as @code{github.user} but for the
Github Enterprise instance identified by HOST.

The reason why separate variables are used is that this makes it
possible to set the both values globally instead of having to set
one of the values locally in each and every repository that is
connected to the Github Enterprise instance, not Github.com.
@end defvar

@defvar github.host

This variable should only be set locally for a repository and
specifies the Github Enterprise edition that that repository is
connected to.  You should not set this globally because then each
and every repository becomes connected to the specified Github
Enterprise instance, including those that should actually be
connected to Github.com.

When this is undefined, then "api.github.com" is used (define in the
constant @code{ghub-default-host-host}, which you should never attempt to
change.)
@end defvar

@defvar ghub-override-system-name

Ghub uses a different token for each quadruple `(USERNAME PACKAGE
HOST LOCAL-MACHINE)`.  Theoretically it could reuse tokens to some
extend but that would be more difficult to implement, less flexible,
and less secure (though slightly more convenient).

A token is identified on the respective Github instance (Github.com
or a Github Enterprise instance) using the pair `(PACKAGE .
LOCAL-MACHINE)`, or more precisely the string "Emacs package PACKAGE
@@ LOCAL-MACHINE".  USERNAME and HOST do not have to be encoded
because the token is stored for USERNAME on HOST and cannot be used
by another user and/or on another instance.

There is one potential problem though; for any given `(PACKAGE
. LOCAL-MACHINE)` there can only be one token identified by "Emacs
package PACKAGE @@ LOCAL-MACHINE", Github does not allow multiple
tokens with the same description because it uses the description as
the identifier.  (It could use some hash instead, but alas it does
not.)

If you have multiple machines and some of them have the same name,
then you should probably change that as this is not how thing ought
to be.  However if you dual-boot, then it might make sense to give
that machine the same name regardless of what operating system you
have booted into.

You could use the same token on both operating systems, but setting
that up might be somewhat difficult because it is not possible to
download an existing token from Github.  You could of course locally
copy the token, but that is inconvenient and would make it harder to
only revoke the token used on your infected Windows installation
without also revoking it for your totally safe *BSD installation.

Alternatively you can set this variable to a unique value, that will
then be used to identify the local machine instead of the value
returned by @code{system-name}.
@end defvar

@bye
