\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename monky.info
@settitle Monky User Manual
@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2010 Anantha Kumaran.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.
@end quotation
@end copying

@node Top
@top Monky User Manual

Monky is an emacs extension, provides an interactive interface for Hg

@menu
* Introduction::
* Sections::
* Status::
* Untracked files::
* Missing Files::
* Staging and Committing::
* Merged Files::
* Pushing and Pulling::
* Log::
* Blame::
* Branch::
* Queue::
* Using Hg Directly::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Monky provides an interactive interface for Hg. Using Monky, your can
selectively commit files, view the diffs and other things.

@node Sections
@chapter Sections

All items in the Monky buffers are nested 'sections'. The visibility
of the current section can be toggled using @kbd{TAB} key. When a
section is hidden, only its first line is shown and all its children
are completely invisible.

@node Status
@chapter Status

Running @kbd{M-x monky-status} while visiting any file in a repo
displays the status of the hg repo. The status buffer list down the
missing files, untracked files and changed files. By default the diff
of the files are invisible. Use @kbd{TAB} key to toggle the visibility.

During a merge the buffer will show the list of merged files, and
files unmodified during the merge.

@node Untracked files
@chapter Untracked files

you can add a untracked file by typing key @kbd{s}. Type @kbd{k} to
delete the file.

@node Missing Files
@chapter Missing Files

This section list the files missing from the repo. Typing @kbd{s} will
remove the file from the repo. To restore the file type @kbd{k}.

@node Staging and Committing
@chapter Staging and Committing

@emph{Changes} section will list all the changes in the repo. Using
monky you can select a subset of your changes and commit it. Type
@kbd{s} to stage a file. Typing @kbd{S} will stage all files.

@emph{Staged Changes} section will list all the staged changes in the
repo. Type @kbd{u} to unstage a file. Typing @kbd{U} will unstage all
the previously staged files.

Once you staged all the necessary files type @kbd{c}. This will pop-up
a buffer for the commit message. Typing @kbd{C-c C-c} will commit all
the staged files.

You can reset the current working directory by typing @kbd{X}.

Hg doesn't have any staging area. So staging and unstaging won't make
any changes to your repo unless you commit.

@node Merged Files
@chapter Merged Files

After a merge, this section will list the files merged. Typing @kbd{m}
will mark the file as resolved and @kbd{x} will mark the file as
unresolved. After a merge, Hg doesn't allows to commit a subset of
changes. so files can't be staged or unstaged. So committing after a
merge will commit all the merged and unmodified files during the
merge.

@node Pushing and Pulling
@chapter Pushing and Pulling

Type @kbd{P} to push the current branch, @kbd{f} to pull changes
from remote and @kbd{F} to fetch changes from the remote. You can
specify the source/destination to the previous commands  with a prefix
argument.

@node Log
@chapter Log

Typing @kbd{l} will bring up the log buffer. This will list the commit
logs of the repo. You can use @kbd{n} and @kbd{p} to move to the
previous and next commit. Type @kbd{RET} to see the commit
information, @kbd{C} to checkout the commit.

Monky will show only @code{monky-log-cutoff-length} entries. Typing
@kbd{e} will show twice as many entries. @kbd{C-u e} will show all
entries, and given a numeric prefix argument, @kbd{e} will add this
number of entries.

@node Blame
@chapter Blame

Run @kbd{M-x monky-blame-current-file} to see the annotation of the
current file. Type @kbd{RET} to see the commit which
introduced/changed the current line.

@node Branch
@chapter Branch

Typing @kbd{b} will bring up the branch buffer. This will list all the
branches. You can use @kbd{C} to checkout a branch.

@node Queue
@chapter Queue

Use @kbd{M-x monky-queue} or @kbd{Q} from the status buffer to view
the queue buffer. The queue buffer will list the @emph{Applied
Patches}, @emph{UnApplied Patches} and the @emph{Series}.

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .85
@headitem Key @tab Description
@item u
@tab pop the selected patch and all the patches before it
@item U
@tab pop all the applied patches
@item s
@tab push the selected patch and all the patches before it
@item S
@tab push all the unapplied patches
@item r
@tab refresh(update) the current patch with the changes in working
directory
@item C-u r
@tab refresh the current patch and allows to edit the commit message
@item R
@tab rename the selected patch
@item k
@tab remove the selected patch
@item N
@tab create a new patch on top of current patch
@item C-u N
@tab same as N except this will also read the commit message for the patch
@item i
@tab import(qimport) patches from change sets. a change set at the point
or change sets in a selected region (when selected) will be imported.
@item d
@tab fold the selected patch into the current patch
@item f
@tab apply(qfinish) the selected patch into repo history
@item F
@tab apply(qfinish) all applied patches into repo history
@item G
@tab reset the guards of the selected patch with new guards
@item o
@tab pop all patches and edit .hg/patches/series file to reorder them
@end multitable

@node Using Hg Directly
@chapter Using Hg Directly

To run a Hg command directly type @kbd{:} and enter the command in the
minibuffer. This will refresh the status buffer after the execution of
command.  The output of the command can be viewed by typing @kbd{$}.

@bye
