== mediawiki.el -- Edit mediawiki sites from emacs ==

This version of mediawiki.el represents a merging of wikipedia-mode.el (maintained by Uwe Brauer) from [http://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/wikipedia-mode.el EmacsWiki] for its font-lock code, menu, draft mode, replying and convenience functions to produce mediawiki.el 2.0.

=== Installation ===

If you use [http://melpa.org/#/mediawiki MELPA], you can install via the M-x package-list-packages interface. This is preferrable as you will have access to updates automatically.

Otherwise, just make sure this file is in your load-path (usually ~/.emacs.d is included) and put (require 'mediawiki.el) in your ~/.emacs or ~/.emacs.d/init.el file.

==== Configuration and use ====

 M-x customize-group RET mediawiki RET
 *dink* *dink*
 M-x mediawiki-site RET Wikipedia RET

Open a wiki file:    M-x mediawiki-open
Save a wiki buffer:  C-x C-s
Save a wiki buffer with a different name:  C-x C-w

==== About Security ====

Although there is a place to put your password when you customize this package, there is no need to store your password in plain text.

If mediawiki sees that the password is empty, then it will use [https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_mono/auth.html the auth-source library] to retrieve the password.  This will allow you to use encryption to store your passwords.


=== TODO ===

* Change customization to explicitly tell mediawiki.el to use the auth-source library.
* Optionally use org-mode formatting for editing and translate that to mw
* Move url-* methods to url-http
* Use the MW API to support searching, etc.
* Clean up and thoroughly test imported wikimedia.el code
* Improve language support.  Currently there is a toggle for English or German.  This should probably just be replaced with the ability to use MediaWiki's i18n files in json format.
